# Encoder-Decoder Transformer with Variational Bottleneck.

# Acknowledgements.

This repo is based on Andrej Karpathy's nanoGPT. https://github.com/karpathy/nanoGPT

# Disclaimer.

This work is still in progress. The model is not yet good. I am looking for collaborators. 🤗

So if you are curious about learning more about MIDI and transformers, do not hesitate to review the code. If you have any questions let me know! Preferably via GitHub issues.

# Goal.

The goal is to create a music transformer for MIDI files that has a variational bottleneck. Usecases would be musical interpolation and generation of long sequences.

# Current state.

- The model is able to learn to reconstruct the input sequence.
- So far the bottleneck aka latent space vectors generated by the encoder are not yet used by the decoder.

# Notes.

- This is an early work in progress. The essential pieces are there but the model is not yet good.
- The architecture is a classic encoder-decoder transformer. See "Attention is all you need" for details.
- The variational bottleneck is a fully convolutional network. Instead of a vector, the latent space is a matrix. This is inspired by latent diffusion.
- I am looking for a way to weaken the decoder. If the decoder is too strong the latent space is not taken into account.
- Currently I am experimenting with token dropout to weaken the decoder. VAE beta warmup is also an option, but not implemented yet.
- Currently I am experimenting with 500 midi files from the js-fakes dataset. This allows me to train on a single GPU. 
- It is planned to go to a bigger dataset soon.

# Details.

## Regularization: Data Augmentation with Token Dropout.

You can apply token dropout to the decoder and if you like to the encoder as well. This is a form of data augmentation. It is a way to weaken the decoder. If the decoder is too strong the latent space is not taken into account. See `source/dataset.py` for details.

## Regularization: VAE Beta Warmup.

It is possible to put a weight term, called beta, on the KL divergence loss. This is called beta warmup. It is a way to weaken or strengthen the decoder. If the decoder is too strong the latent space is not taken into account. See `source/trainer.py` for details.

# Getting started.

- Prepare to submit Github issues. I am looking for collaborators. 🤗 https://github.com/AI-Guru/musictransformer2023/issues
- Get a decent GPU. I am using an A100, which is clearly overkill. Way smaller GPUs will do just fine.
- Create a dataset by running `python source/preprocess.py`. This will download the js-fakes dataset and prepare it for training.
- Better set up Weights and Biases. Create an account and run `wandb login`. This will allow you to track your experiments. https://wandb.ai/
- Run `python runtraining.py`. This will train the model. You can track the progress on Weights and Biases.
- Note `python runtraininggrid.py` is an example for grid search.


# Thanks!
